So it's interesting.
You asked me to check my tape recorder, and you have lost a few important interviews.
No.
You see, I'm so inept.
There's an irony here.
The tape recorder is my right hand.
You know, when I talk, of course, I'm able to get someone to transcribe it when I finish, and I said, get everything down with a tape recorder, even a pause or a cough, or a certain kind of laugh.
For example, among African-American people, the laugh comes in strange moments sometimes.
It's like when someone is recounting a moment of humiliation.
As Big Bill Broomsey and old Broomsey G.R., O-N-Z-Y, recounted the moment he was a working man, blues singer.
He was a molder, and he was teaching this young guy, a white guy, how to do the job and taught him.
So when it came to firing people, he was fired.
He had to get retained.
As he tells that, he starts laughing.
Or a moment, he and I were to bar together Winston and several other white guys, and they'd serve us, but not him.
Really?
We refused.
Oh, yeah, Lafayette, Indiana, on our way to Purdue University for a concert, a folk song concert.
And so, as we leave, he's starting to laugh.
It's nowhere to safety valve.
Laugh is a blues, a laugh on the key from crying, was one of the songs.
The laughing on the outside, crying on the inside.
Well, today you'd say with African Americans, laughing to keep from raging.
But in any event, so to me, the tape recorder is important, and yet I have goofed up because I'm mechanically inept, let's face it.
I cannot drive a car.
Come on.
No, it's true.
Do you drive a car?
Never.
You don't?
I don't have the biggest idea how to drive a car.
How did you get around?
Taxi cars?
Well, I get around buses, you know, when my wife drives, but I haven't the slightest idea.
And so here I am, the irony, I've lost, because I've pushed the wrong buttons, I've lost Martha Graham.
Imagine, I've lost Michael Redgrave, the British director.
I almost thought Jacques Tati, the French actor, and he got a kick out of that because he hates machines.
And all his plays deal with man versus machine.
And I almost blew the interview, and he said, this is great.
He says, come to my hotel and we'll do it again.
That was very nice.
Yeah.
But he says, it makes me feel good, because that's my point.
Were you able to reconstruct any of these that you lost?
No, they're lost, because the voice is lost, too.
And the way she talked, remembered early choreography and dances.
But so this is, so that's why I ask you to check.
Check it all.
I've done, over the last 20 years, I've done close to a thousand interviews myself.
with authors, and I have quite an archive of tapes.
Thank God, I've never lost a one, but I always check, and I have good equipment.
I mean, it's like what they tell you, if you work in the mills or you're carpenter, I mean, you're only as good as your equipment, as your tools.
That's right.
So I always check it, make sure I have fresh batteries, and I used to go with a backup.
Anyway, let's talk about, I mean, you certainly qualify
You could have been one of your own subjects in this book, couldn't you?
Well, I'm the big A3.
I was born 1912, and that's the year the Titanic sank.
So I call myself a Titanic baby.
And I always say that went down, I came up, but then who said life was fair?
But I'm like the Titanic in the way I've skirted some icebergs here and there in my life.
I'm yet to hit the big iceberg or the tip of it that knocked off the Titanic.
And so, in a way, I'm eligible, certainly, as far as the calendar goes, eligible for the book.
And so, I suppose you'd say, the book itself, you know, deals with people of a certain age.
Coming of age, the title, is also ironic to take off.
Coming of age.
mean anthropologically, you know.
Margaret Mead, in her classic book, Coming of Age in Samoa, is the kid reaching the age of puberty, boys and girls.
And I say this is the age of puberty of thought, 70 and over.
70 is the minimum age.
I chose that deliberately because that's the biblical, the scriptural three score and ten as man, the man, woman span.
But because of
medical discoveries and technological advances.
We have lifespan increased considerably.
If you multiply the 70 by their collective years, you're in the thousands, isn't it, in terms of years of experience?
Oh, yeah.
Like this book, for example.
There are people here 99 years old.
Her aunt was a slave, Carolyn Perry.
She's now, since the book, she celebrated her 100th birthday.
But you put them together, the 70 people or so, they're thousands of years.
You want to mention that you've lost three of the people that you interviewed.
Oh, you've died since.
Yeah.
Or more than that.
Is that right?
Since I wrote that, and since I was able to make the second edition, a couple more have died.
This is funny.
We're talking about equipment going down, and I can't get away.
It's never happened.
It looks like the Battle of Machines versus Man.
I was cursed by my own... I'm sorry, just keep talking.
So basically we're talking about, as you're fixing the camera, you're talking about the nature of the book.
The reason this book is done, there's a subtitle.
Coming of Age is the title.
The subtitle is Our Century as Told by Those Who Lived It.
We're five years away from the end of the century, five years from the end of the millennium, like 2000s, the new millennium, no.
Have we progressed?
To what extent?
Where have we retrogressed?
We've transgressed, God knows.
And so here we are.
These people have lived most of the century, and that's why I've called upon them as our unofficial historians, you might say.
They're much like...
I think of them as Alex Haley, when working on Roots, returned to the land, or went to the land of his ancestors in West Africa, Gambia.
And there he met the Griots, T-R-I-O-T, who were storytellers, and in a way, from one generation to another.
So these people in my book are sort of my Griots.
I did an interview once with Alden Whitman, who used to write obituaries for the New York Times.
Oh, I remember him, yes.
And he used to interview his subjects.
It was quite unusual.
He would go and interview them in anticipation of their death.
Well, I remember I never... One regret is just precisely that.
I knew him.
He was a friend, and he got a lot of stuff out of me.
But then one day, he said, let you and I have lunch, meaning of course...
I said, don't rush me.
Don't rush me.
But you know what I'm talking about.
I never had lunch, and that's my regret.
But he said he used to go and he'd sit down, and it could be Harry Truman or whomever, and they'd say, well, what's the purpose of this?
And they'd say, well, it's for the future.
He said, oh, you mean when I die?
Oh!
In that instance, they really would want to talk to get the record straight.
And also he said, for some reason, and this is pertinent to what you've done, he said,
When people hit the age of 70, he said they begin, they learn how to count.
They're able to clock, they're alert, aware of.
Do you find this same kind of a thing?
I find an awareness on the part of people in the book of mortality, that it's approaching mortality naturally, with their aches and their pains at the same time.
In this book, the
underlying theme or the recurring theme is they don't grieve for themselves.
People I've interviewed, people whose lives have been pretty full.
It's not the golf cart set, not that I'm opposed to golf or anything.
It's simply people who have been involved in the world outside themselves in some sense of community, whether it be labor people or people in the neighborhood fighting waste dumps, whoever it might be, peace groups,
but people outside themselves.
And so their lives are pretty full, but they grieve for the young.
And the young today, they feel have no sense of past, and no fault of their own, and no wonder about the future.
Many bewildered young.
Many of them say, I'm not going to be as well off as my old man.
And that's quite a reversal of the American dream, which my kid will have better than me.
So that's part of it.
Did you have a...
Tell me about the selection process.
Now, you say in your acknowledgments how you apologize to so many people who didn't make the cut.
Well, you see, I got to get that straight first.
I interviewed more people in Matthew that are in the book.
The people I did not put in the book are just as good as real in the book.
And this is the hard part.
This is the bad part.
Who do I leave out and why?
Well, it's like the director of a play, I suppose.
There are two actors equally as good.
Whom do you choose?
One is not better than the other, but maybe balancing it against the rest of the cast is what in sports they call a judgment call.
Sure.
And that's hard.
That was the tough part.
When you, these people, you also think some scouts.
You call them scouts, people who... Oh, well, I always call them scouts.
That's how I work.
Somebody tells me about someone...
I can hear about this person, and I, when I was doing the book on working, for example, working deals with different occupations, different jobs people do.
I wanted to say, I know a washroom attendant, says this guy.
This guy, you ought to get this washroom.
Sure, I did use a washroom.
He tells me what it's like to be there, or a parking lot, or a teacher, or a small businessman, but a certain kind of person, they say, who's able to articulate, ordinary person, but as they see,
These ordinary people, not big shots, are able to say what's in the thoughts of the others, but they can't say.
Others can't say.
It's inchoate in the others.
And so someone says, I've talked to this woman on the block about something, a housewife about something.
She says, why don't you go see Florence at the end of the block?
Oh, Florence.
Well, Florence is the one.
See Florence.
She talks a certain way.
Florence, but she is in the same strata of society.
Blue-collar housewife might be.
But Florence had that added insight or something.
Says what this woman wants to say, but can't.
But a woman knows Florence can say it.
So it's the Florenses of the world I look for.
Now, there was a very good friend of mine who recently died.
He was in his late 70s.
He was alone.
He was a lifelong bachelor.
He was a book reviewer of mine.
Pardon me, I must say.
That's all right.
And I remember he was saying, he said, the years go by so quickly, it's the days that go by so quickly.
Which, that reminds me.
When somebody's doing a job of work, let's say it's a spot welder, an auto plant, that's work, and it's drudgery, the same, do the same thing.
You've got this 20-pound
welding guns, shooting welds, into this revolving snake, the assembly line.
So he's yearning for the time that he can retire, 30 and out, and I don't want to work as one there, 30 years, and he's got a pension and live on.
He's there, where's a teacher?
The old guy might love his work.
He doesn't want to be forced to retire.
But the days go by slowly, and it's a funny story, but it's a true one, and it retells everything.
He's a meter reader.
I call him Conrad.
It's the word.
You know what a gas meter reader is?
He's got the flashlight put down in the basement, looks at the meter.
He says, you know, this is the days go by slowly.
But you know what?
He says, there are two things on my mind in my life.
Dogs and women.
So I say to myself, the first is reality, the second is fantasy.
And so he tells about the dogs and the trouble he has with dogs.
You know, they're nipping at him and they're smacking him.
And he's got that flashlight as a weapon to hold him for.
And sometimes the dog bit him.
The lady of the house balls him out.
Even though he's bitten by the dog, the next woman is going down the stairs to the basement leading him down there.
A little poodle goes in front of me and just smacks it.
I smack it to make up for the one I missed over there.
I said, that's enough about dogs.
I said, but you were talking about women.
What do you mean?
Well, look, it hasn't happened to me yet, but it's possible.
What?
Well, you know, like in the summertime, in the suburbs, you got that young housewife, pretty old, she's pretty, she's lying on a blanket getting the sun outside in the backyard.
How old is this guy?
Yeah.
Around the 40s or so.
Oh, he's a young man.
But he's a guest reader, you see.
And he says, and so I see you're lying out on the blanket,
getting some sun on her back in a bikini, you know.
Now, of course, she's loosened her bra, as they do, getting the sun, you know, and she's on a blanket.
And so I creep up very slowly, very close, I holler, yes, man, and she turns around.
And then he pauses, you know, I get balled out an awful lot, but it makes the day go faster.
And that's anything to make the day go faster.
That's right.
Is this a companion book, in your view, to the working book of 20 years ago?
Well, that's an interesting question.
It's not so much a companion book as it is.
It's almost a fusion of a number of books.
It's about what changes happen in jobs.
You know, the carpenter tells the prefab how the electrical saws on the computer and the effect it's had on
people working north, all that.
At the same time, it's also part of hard times, because people are remembering a certain moment in their life, the depression.
It's part of the Good War, earlier book about World War II, and it's part of working.
So in a way, it's the fusion of the previous books, reflections by someone who's lived through the periods of the previous books.
So it's almost a natural follow-up
with the fact that age and ageism is among us.
It is.
It's so appropriate, isn't it?
Here we are in 1995, approaching the end of the second millennium, in the century for that matter.
I mean, is there any kind of particular wisdom, in your view, to be gleaned from time?
Oh, boy.
I don't know.
Well, that's just the point.
What is it we've learned?
There have been advances.
There have been advances technologically, more than advances, leaps.
But the wars, think about that.
The evil empire is dead, so-called.
But the wars go on, and nationalism, and one reason or another, old tribalism, and people, the big boys, at the same time, pushing smaller boys into battles.
And...
There's some little truth as far as race is concerned, deep, deep, deep.
At the same time, bits here and there.
You always hope gains have been made.
You look upon these old.
Some are hopeful, some are not.
But basically, I think what's in me, guys, is also in many of them.
There is less, at least for me, I always looked at the Sunnies, less optimism than there was.
But at the same time, hope.
It's hard to explain.
I'm not optimistic, but hopeful, because hope.
There's a woman named Jessie de la Cruz, and Jessie is Hispanic, Mexican-American.
Jessie was a farm worker, worked with Cesar Chavez.
She says, we have a saying in Mexico, a Spanish saying, and I'll translate this very badly.
Esperanza, hope.
Muera.
dies el ultimo last.
Hope dies last.
Without hope, you're head in the oven.
Without hope.
So there's got to be hope.
You know, what pleases me a great deal is that you don't sugarcoat this.
You don't pretend that...
It's easy.
It's wonderful.
Being old is getting old.
Oh, my God, old.
That's very important, isn't it?
Sophia Mumford, the widow of the great Lewis Mumford, whoever said, going old is nice and sweet and golden.
It's awful, and it's rotten, and there are illnesses that set you.
And her late husband, of course, the great critic, lived to the 90s, and his old age, here he was, this humanistic,
highly cultured, enlightened, and generous-hearted man.
You see him there in the 90s now.
He's incontinent.
He's tough.
Not meanster, but his temper is bad.
He's jumping around doing whatever he dreamed of doing.
And so getting old is not that great.
It's just no bargain.
At the same time, people try to be
Old Gracie, just as I'm talking to you right now, Nick, you said people have died since the book.
As a matter of fact, Helen Neering, 92, the widow of Scott Neering, a very great man of the past.
She and her husband, he once upon a time was blacklisted because he was very anti-establishment, lost jobs.
But later years, he and his wife, Helen, he died at 100, decided to die at 100.
But he and his wife, Helen, became the gurus of the health food movement and many young fans, thousands.
And so they wrote books on living well, eating well.
And so I saw her, talked to her, and she's in great form.
And when she goes, she hopes it's soon, you know, maybe crack her head and go.
Not soon, she hopes it's sudden.
Guess what?
About three days before the conversation with you, I think of an item.
Helen Earing killed her car, which she was driving, crashes into a tree.
And so there, the way she wanted it.
Can you really tell when people lose their will to live?
Well, of course, these people haven't.
The ones in the book haven't lost will to live.
They've lost a lot of the hope in the world.
Curiosity is maintained for a while.
Oh, some says, one guy says, Pink Ferry, he's a guy who
was a public relations guy, and he's up on everything.
He's a sidekick, a rubber band, and Hutchins, the Ford Foundation.
Ping says, he's not wild about living in the year 2000.
The way things are going, he just assumed not that the year 2000.
Do you find, I noticed that a lot of your subjects are hopeful.
Oh, yeah.
Well, they're mixed.
It's a mixed thing.
It's what I call guarded hopefulness.
Guarded is the key word.
Yes, no, yes, no.
But hopeful in that, hopeful of seeing some change before we hit that year 2000, some change.
In your introduction, you bemoaned.
Of course, I'm an old newspaper man, and when I first went to work, I remember the old linotype machines clacking away and the sounds of the city room.
You described it in the way.
Well, Hank Ettinger.
Hank Ettinger was a linotype operator.
He worked for all kinds of newspapers and magazines.
He started out as a kid, a printer's devil, a set type.
And he saw the trade, the profession, change with technological advances.
And he says, in the old, the composing room was like the city desk.
The city desk was like the front page.
There was noise and hollering back and forth, but there was a life.
Now you go to the composing room, there's silence.
But the city desk!
Well, you think you're going to have reporters talking and calling out?
They're all looking young reporters, male, female, staring into the windows of a computer terminal, it's called.
You're talking to a guy that's wholly illiterate when it comes to the computer language.
And so staring, and it's silent.
It's eerie.
It's not only that.
When I first broke in, there were people, there were so many reporters.
There was a city hall reporter, there was a police reporter, there was a court reporter, there was an arts reporter, education reporter, business.
They're all gone.
These papers have been bought up by conglomers that have let go people by 60%.
And when I started work in Worcester, there were 940.
Now you're hitting, now you're hitting a big one.
It's papers, it's everything.
It's publishing houses.
It's everything.
It's the conglomerates.
You find that fewer and fewer people control more and more stuff, information as well as the material.
And so that's the part.
You find it very, you know that.
Now it's one, there was one guy, he's an old-time public relations guy.
Even, see what's happened is the touch of impersonality has entered the picture.
We'll come to the computer in a minute.
The touch of the human touch seems to be disappearing to great extent.
And this guy was oppressing.
He still is.
He has a Lyric Africa of Chicago, and he's very funny.
He's an old-time person, flamboyant.
He used all the wild adjectives that describe the production of Carmen.
He's that tempestuous, chipped-team maiden, you know, and he's an old-timer on his own.
And so he says, in the old days, I'd write my own captions when I brought a prima donna to the town or a famous striptease artist.
And he'd go to the city desk, he'd sit down, he'd take his jacket off, roll up with the type of caption.
Today, if I did that, seven security guys would come and throw me out.
That's exactly right.
And he said, I couldn't even work at a computer anyway.
So we see the personal touch.
And that's where we come now.
the computer.
Does it do good?
Well, of course.
Does it help?
Well, an investment banker talks about spreadsheets used to sweat to do, but now it's easy.
An old lawyer says that what's easier it is, but the old painter, Jacob Lawrence, the African-American painter, says his students just retired from the University of Washington in Seattle, and he says his students on the computer frightened him a little because, and depressed him a bit, because
I was in his studio, and there he showed, look at this chisel and the hammer I got, and he had this paintbrush.
Will you smell the paint in the room?
Touch the hairs of that brush.
He's always this part of my painting, my breathing, all part of my painting.
But some of the kids says, oh, you know, I can do a painting in half an hour.
And they brag, I mean, on the computer, and of course they brag, my hand didn't
even touch it.
Imagine that.
And that's what, see, same thing with the doctor.
The old doctor in the book says, oh, he says, no question this computer has helped develop and many things.
But I asked the young intern about our patient.
How'd she do last night?
He's all just a, well, Mr. Smith, you mean?
Yeah, well, just a minute.
He goes to his computer, punches out the latest lab test report.
And out comes the report, and he says, oh, looks good, looks good.
Wait a minute, says the old-time doctor.
I mean, did she say anything about the pain?
Did it change?
How did she sleep?
He says, I don't know about that.
You don't know about that.
That's the person.
That's why I became a doctor.
How does she feel?
Feel is a word.
Feel.
And that's that feel that may be vanishing.
And that bothers you.
Does that disturb you?
Oh, me, of course.
Well, I'm no good at the answer.
Earlier I established the fact, talking to you, that I'm not very good.
Technically, if you ask me about a computer, I'm just learning to use a typewriter.
And so a computer to me is like nuclear physics.
So when you use a language as a computer, I see a language.
Hardware, software.
Hardware to me is a hammer, nails, a pot, a pan.
software, linens, pillowcases, bedspreads, Turkish towels.
You're talking to the wrong guy.
Are you having fun?
Do you have fun?
Well, I try to find humor without humor.
You're a dead man.
Do you have a perceived audience for your book?
Do you have a perceived audience, an audience for your book?
Well, yeah, I think that you're writing these for, I guess, reading them.
Well, I just hope people anywhere will read it.
That's the book.
I mean, I'm happy in the past that a lot of people have all shades of opinion and position in life have read Working and some of the other books.
Mainly the job is my job.
In all these books, it's sort of a bottom-up approach to history.
history from the bottom up, what was it like, and that's the question for you, what was it like to be a certain person in a certain circumstance living at a certain time?
What was it like to be the small boy in 1933 during the Depression to see a father whom he loved and respected, the carpenter, coming home 11 o'clock in the morning with a tool chest on his shoulder, meaning he was canned.
What's it like for the wife, for the guy, and the fights in the family, and the lack of esteem that comes as a result of it?
And as you get that, you might get an idea of what's it like to be jobless today, you see?
So if we attack people on welfare, I remember people on relief, overwhelmingly white.
Well, most people on welfare are white today in America.
But let's say, if we think of black people, then relief.
There were fatherless families, and the guy goes off looking somewhere, dispirited, trying to find a job.
They were just leaving.
There were people investigating, people in relief.
They were called midnight creepers in some quarters.
That is, the caseworker or the inspector to see if there's an old man in the house.
That was a ... See, what was it like to live?
What's it like to be a young infantryman hitting a village just after D-Day?
or of that matter in German.
So what was it like to be a woman having a first job in the war in a defense plant, not to be the kid?
What was it like to do a certain kind of job?
That was the idea, to offer history from below.
There's a Bertolt Brecht poem, but I use the inscription for one.
Like if I were to ask you others, who built the pyramids?
I would really have said, well, the pharaohs, you know.
Pharaoh didn't lift the fingers.
You know, Mrs. Pharaoh, you know, her nails were as immaculate as Elizabeth Taylor's.
You know, anonymous slaves through the centuries built the period.
And so Brecht's poem goes, who built the seven gates of thieves?
I mean, who carried those crags of heavy stone, whatever the phrase is.
And he says, when the Chinese wall was built, where did the masons go for lunch?
When Caesar conquered Gaul, and we get this in Latin one, Caesar's commentaries, you know, all Gaul divided into three parts.
When Caesar conquered Gaul, was there not even a cook in the army?
And then the big one, when the Armada, the Spanish Armada, sank.
And I remember the date even now, 1588.
We got that in school, and we read that Sir Francis Drake,
He conquered the Spanish armada.
He sank the Spanish armada.
Sir Francis Drake all by himself.
You mean he lifted a garter, a knight's garter, and said, Spaniard, surrender?
Was that it?
Sir Francis, and so he, so Beth says, when the armada sank, we read that King Philip, King Philip of Spain, King Philip wept.
And here's the big sentence.
Were there no other tears?
Were there no other tears of those scores of thousands who may have died in those battles?
And that, in a sense, is what I tried to do.
Who wept those other tears?
That's more or less so.
Your passion for the working man and woman is undiminished.
It must be really frustrating to see.
You mentioned that there's no labor news section in the newspaper.
Oh, yeah.
And you wonder, you look at these... I'm asking you to talk politics, Gingrich and everything, but... Well, think of it now.
The labor, that is, American trade unions, had never been in such bad shape.
It's amazing, isn't it?
Yeah.
There's little recurrences now, maybe with a new leadership, maybe with Carrie beating the thugs of the Teamsters Union.
Maybe the little touches and new kinds of unions, but basically, and it has to do with the ignorance, not, I didn't mean stupidity, I mean, the ignorance, lack of knowledge of the history of labor by the young.
Many of the young say, I hate unions, and so I tell this comic story.
You saw that story, me waiting for the bus.
Yeah.
And the guy's reading the Wall Street Journal.
That's right, she's got the Vanity Fair.
It's yuppie, I hate to use the word yuppie, but it is in this instance, an upscale couple.
And I make conversations all the time, and I talk to myself a lot, and I find the audience when I talk to myself very appreciative, you know.
Anyway, I'm trying to make, I say, you know, Labor Day coming up, and they say, we hate unions, and I say, oh boy.
And then I try to say,
You work eight hours a day.
How come you don't work 18 hours a day?
Your great, great grandparents did.
You know why you worked eight and not 18?
Because guys fighting for the eight-hour day got hanged in Chicago.
It's an event way back.
And next thing, I got this guy against the mailbox and he's scared.
And then, and what the wind-up is, how did, why would he know?
And then, as you point earlier, he doesn't know.
Where does he read about labor?
He doesn't.
There's a business section of the paper, sports section, feature section, theater art section style, no labor.
And so as a result, there's no knowledge.
That's part of it.
You don't use, so far as I can see, the good old days.
That's not a phrase that you use.
Oh, no.
Go ahead, I'm sorry.
They were bad old days.
You are promoting the passing of the good old days.
I know, I'm bemoaning the passing of history, of a knowledge what was.
So it was only from the past we learned about a future and a present.
How can we have a present or a future built on zero, on nothing, on a bubble?
There is a past.
And what is it to be learned from that past?
We attack big government, same ones.
And I say the daddies and granddaddies' butts of these guys were saved.
by the New Deal.
Many guys got a job on the WPA.
Ronald Reagan's father got a job on the WPA, the town of Dixon, Illinois, was helped, probably saved by the WPA.
That's the Work Project Administration.
No, I don't.
No, to the young who may be reading you.
And it was part of what's called the New Deal.
Am I saying government, big government's straight?
No, of course it does.
horrendous bureaucratic things.
You mean there's no bureaucracy in private enterprise?
They do wrong things, of course, but it seems to me only when it does something on behalf of those up against it is when it's attacked.
Never attacked for its military expenditures today that are wild and crazy and goofy, when the reason for it, the main reason, evil empire, so-called, is gone.
And yet, here we stood, no one questioned the billions.
I heard of driving down today, I listened to the news stations all the way down.
Oh, it's working?
Yeah.
I always do this.
That red light tells you it's fine.
I'm so suspicious of machines, you know.
Well, I mean, it's so ironic that I've never had a problem with this camera.
Isn't it working?
Oh, it's fine, yeah, but I get rid of the flash.
Oh, you know why it's not working?
Because I'm here.
Well, I think so.
You think I'm kidding.
Many times.
I've never had a breakdown.
There's something, I think the machines know who their enemy and friend is.
And I have difficulty wherever I go.
Elevators don't act as a dude.
People say, they don't behave that way.
But I'm here.
But you know what I did, you see?
Let me explain what I did.
I couldn't get the flash to work.
So I said, okay.
Okay.
I'm traveling with faster film, so I changed, I took out the slower film, and I put in a very fast film, so now I'm shooting with available light.
It is working.
Oh, it's fine.
These pictures will be better, actually, because there won't be any flash.
Great.
So there'll be natural light.
Oh, that's great.
So, but I mean, if I didn't have the faster film, I wouldn't have been able to do that.
Anyway, you know, do you consider yourself a late bloomer when it comes to writing?
I don't know.
Someone called me that.
I guess, well, I didn't...
You were 54, I guess, when you published it?
In 1967, published me in 55.
Got arrived in 53.
Now, I did a book in 1957 for young people, for jazz, called Giants of Jazz.
But this series, called Oral History, is
began when I was 55.
How did you happen onto this concept of oral history?
Well, you're sitting right now in the home of Andre Schifrin, who was my publisher.
Famous?
And Andre's the guy responsible.
Really?
He saw something I'd written, or an interview was republished on the radio station, and he got this idea.
And he had published, before I met him, he had published an American edition of a book by Jan Myrdal.
He's the son of Donald Myrdal.
wrote The American Dilemma, and his mother won the Nobel Peace Prize at group Alvomir.
This is Yan, who visited China shortly after the revolution, and he visited the small town in China, North China, and he's describing changes that took place in the lives, daily lives of these people as a result before and after the revolution.
So Andre Shepard called me shortly thereafter, publishing this book,
report from a Chinese village.
He said, how about you reporting for an American village?
He said, Chicago.
And I said, you out of your mind, how can you compare a city, a huge industrial complex Chicago to a small Chinese village in Chicago where a million things are happening, the civil rights, it was the 60s, the civil rights revolution, the cybernetic revolution, autumn, how can you do that?
But I did it, Division Street America.
And it was rather well received.
So six months later, Andre says again on the phone, how about a book about the Great American Depression?
So I say, are you out of your mind?
And I do the hard times.
And that's well received.
Did you have this phrase, this oral history?
Well, oral history is an old, old phrase, you know.
Yeah, but really where it's the voice of the individual.
Yeah.
The authorial intrusion is... But oral history... If it's there, it's not there.
Oral history has preceded the written word.
You know, before the printing press, there was oral history.
People are storytellers.
Those people Alex Haley talked about.
The Griots were there long before Gutenberg invented the printing press.
And in America, Appalachian country, are still storytellers.
So, in fact, I'm not really a historian, a scholar.
I'm not a scholar.
So I call myself a maybe oral journalism or a guerrilla journalist.
And I think earlier you asked how I work, and I say improvise around.
Well, a journalist does work with the immediate, I guess, and the historian evaluates.
So what would you feel that you're providing the raw material then for future historians?
Yeah, in a sense.
Someone did say that about the books.
But the idea of people telling about their lives
It was also done way before me during the New Deal.
I mentioned the WPA, the Work Project Administration.
They had a writer's project.
They had a theater project.
And then the writer's project, different writers in different states were seeing old people.
In fact, them old black people were slaves, and this was in the 30s, were still slaves in their childhood, remembering the early days.
And there was railroad folklore and all sorts of American folklore that was gathered.
That was also oral history, in a way, that the people on this New Deal project were doing.
Now, when you sat down with your subjects here, did you have a script?
Did you have an agenda to pursue?
No.
Or did you pretty much... No.
It's the nature of conversation.
I had an idea about what's going to be about working, about the job.
What's it like to be a welder?
Tell me about your day.
But I mean this particular book here.
Oh, no, no.
No, it's just certain old people I wanted, certain contemporaries.
I wanted to see David Brower.
He thought of the enfant terrible, the environmental movement.
David Brower would find earth, you know, friends, earth, or he found a group to fight the polluters.
But then if the group got a little soft, he'd leave it and
found another group, more militant.
And each time he would do this, it makes it easier for the ones who follow me.
They seem so reasonable in contrast to me.
I want to make them seem reasonable.
Well, David Brower, I ought to get him in the book.
And he said, he more or less, he's in the prologue, and he more or less sets the theme.
He says, you know, this century is the wildest, craziest century he's ever been.
The Great Depression, World War II that changed the world,
The Cold War that killed conversation and still to some extent has treated trivia instead of conversation.
The Vietnam War, the computers, all this in this one central.
The Holocaust.
And the Holocaust, of course, and Hiroshima.
Unprecedented.
Auschwitz and Hiroshima.
Think about a man who has created Hamlet and Don Giovanni and Beethoven did the Ninth
as also the same species has done Hiroshima and Nagasaki and Auschwitz, the same generation almost.
And he says, there's been no one like us ever before, and there'll be no one like us ever again, so tell your story now.
So he said, so I had to get him, I had to get a labor guy, so I got Dick Ruther, another guy.
How to get this old woman who's just around, no rule.
But people are kind of fired.
I love that woman who says she fights sleep.
She doesn't want to sleep.
Oh, the old Ian Bessie Donner.
Isn't that wonderful?
Bessie's 94.
She's so afraid she won't wake up again.
Yeah, Bessie's 90.
She wants to stay awake as often as she can.
And Bessie's the one also who says,
I watch TV and sometimes I take a little nip, a touch of scotch.
Good for her.
Because the men on everything look good.
And when I got this, my legs get numb on me.
And that doctor, I got a woman doctor, she'd just bang your legs against the floor.
So I bang my legs against the floor and I feel so much better.
I love the shock quote that you start with.
What?
I love the Bernard Shaw quote that you... Oh, yeah, the very beginning of the introduction.
Yeah, it's just wonderful.
I want to be thoroughly used up when I die.
Fully used up when I die.
Well, many of them feel that way.
Well, I'll tell you, we've gone through a pretty good hour here.
This is good.
You know, this has gone pretty well.
Yeah, we're good.
I have fun.
I've really been looking forward to this.
I am too.
And I'll write this up and
You got an address in the... Where does it appear?
Well, I have a syndicate, a newspaper.
Oh, how?
Put together.
I'm an entrepreneur.
Oh, I see.
Well, you don't need, you don't need this on a tape.
That's my home address.
Okay.
Eight, eight, eight, what do you want it?
It'll be in there.
Oh, eight, my home address, Studs Terkel.
All right.
850 Castlewood, Castle, C-S-T-L-E-W-O-O-D, Terrace or Castlewood.
Chicago,
60640.
One of the great cities in America.
Oh, it is.
It is.
I love Chicago.
I was out there for the ABA in June.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
Would you inscribe this for me?
Well, I've been delighted to.
It's Nicholas Bunman.
Yeah.
Nicholas?
Nicholas.
Here's my card.
I'll give you my card.
Bunman.
Yeah, that's it.
What's next?
Oh, God, that's a good question.
That's what next to three.
I'm sort of optimistic.
I'm 83.
I don't know.
Maybe I'm thinking out loud about writing.
You see, I still have self-doubt.
I always have writing.
Of course, a lot of the stuff with the words of other people, which I work at, of course, and edit and gather.
And introductions is where I write, as well as a book called Talking to Myself.
And so perhaps I was thinking about the introductions in each one of the different books, and maybe five or six of the portraits in each of those books that would have a sort of chronological or a sort of mood continuity at the same time my own writing would be in it.
And I also did a long introduction to the 50th anniversary issue of Grapes of Wrath.
Elaine Steinbrecht, the widow of John Steinbrecht, asked if I would do it.
I have a copy of that.
You got the 50th edition?
I've also got the first.
I've got the first edition, and I have the 50th, too.
The 50th has my introduction.
That's right.
Okay.
And something like that.
In that introduction, I just realized, is a composite of many of the other interviews, because it deals with OTs and poverty, and I have some of the opposite numbers in these books.
and some changing as they got prosperous.
So in a way, it's about that.
That's great.
So we'll see.
Maybe, maybe.
I'm horsing around.
Anyway, this is great.
Well, we're going to get a great story out of this.